---
layout: post
title: Turning an idea into a startup
tags: tech
---

*My Forge co-founder [@Evan_McClure](https://twitter.com/evan_mcclure) and I get a lot of emails from people who want to ambiguously "move forward with something". Evan wants to make this process more specific so more healthcare technology survives limbo. Here are three of his thoughts and recommended first steps, influenced by lean startup approaches.*

## 1. Identify where you are in the process.

+ Where are you on this path? Preliminary idea —> vetted idea —> prototype —> working model.
+ Flesh out the product idea, why it should exist, what developments will be required for it to take shape, etc. Put it down on paper.
+ [@ereinerts](http://www.twitter.com/ereinerts): What are your skills and passions? Are you a coder, a team manager, or a clinician? Who might you want to help you if you eventually find a good idea with a market?

## 2. Understand existing efforts.

+ Make sure what you want to make doesn’t exist already.
+ If it doesn’t exist, this could be because (1) nobody has thought of it, (2) nobody has tried to execute, (3) it has been executed poorly or in the wrong market or at the wrong time, or (4) it’s not something that’s truly needed. Be sure you’re not spending your time doing something that’s been done, that can’t be done, or that nobody will pay for.
+ Deeply understand the needs of the target market.
+ Frame the situation in terms of a problem that your technology can solve.

## 3. Get feedback.

+ Interview customers to home in on your niche. Watch [this short video](http://customerdevlabs.com/2013/11/05/how-i-interview-customers/) that explains how to solicit feedback.
+ This process is iterative, not linear. While you are gaining feedback, you should be building a product (or at least building out your idea on paper) and tweaking your product idea with each interview.
+ Don’t skimp on customer development and don’t rush it. It’s very important and will save you a lot of time and hassle. We interviewed >100 entrepreneurs, clinicians, and industry professionals before we founded Forge.

Once you think the idea is feasible and there exists a compelling market, look into next steps: putting down a good plan on paper, assembling a team, gathering some resources, and making a minimum viable product with which to conduct some customer discovery.
