---
layout: article
title: Meaning and focus
---

A colleague asked me to help find funding for wellness and social justice initiatives. I shared thoughts on two topics: 1) choosing meaningful problems, and 2) focus. Here are my thoughts, slightly edited, and relevant for medical students interested in solving a problem and starting a student group, organization, nonprofit, or startup. I think these thoughts about Forge all the time.

**Point 1: choosing a good *what* can lead to a good *how*, but choosing is really hard.**

The hardest choice is deciding *what* you do, when nothing exists before. How do you know your problem is even important? How you solve it is also hard, but this is tied to the *what* if you are sufficiently specific. My colleague's problem is "high school students are disadvantaged", but that problem is not high-resolution enough to suggest a meaningful and specific solution. Jeff Bezos and Peter Thiel believe it is best to solve a specific problem affecting a small number of people. You can scale that solution to help more people. I may be paraphrasing their thoughts on startup markets, but this is better than trying to solve a big problem for a lot of people, but not doing anything when you fail.

It is very easy to do *something*, slightly less easy to find resources to do it, but really hard to do something meaningful. I think a good way to find something meaningful - but feasible - is to find a specific problem and solve it. You have to do this first, not later, because it will gain momentum and be hard to change. Once an initiative is underway, the mechanics and funding are easy. Medical students can be charismatic and appear intelligent. We try to solve problems that are socially important. These factors make us great salespeople. I am confident my colleague will gain support for these initiatives. However, this ease leads to a dangerous deception.

The world cares about results, so successfully creating something and raising money generates social and psychological reward. The actual meaning of what we created is far more difficult to assess. Feedback is generated from the mechanistic aspects of *how* we do. As long as the *how* works, and the *what* sounds important enough - which every public health or social justice project does - you will be patted on the back. This is dangerous because it blinds us to doing things that really matter.

Why is it so difficult to know if your *how* is meaningful? Because it is hard to measure the right things. We are incentivized to report metrics that demonstrate improvement, such as number of students who take and pass AP exams, or number of high school dropouts. You may need these metrics to secure additional funding, grow your team, and feel successful. But metrics that grow are not always the metrics that matter. Yes, improving AP exam numbers and school retention are good, but they are ultimately proxies for more fundamental issues that may take years to measure.

Further reinforcing the deception that we do meaningful work is our privileged position as healthcare professionals (in training). We are interested in helping people, and our main job in the clinic involves helping people. But these facts do not extend to everything else we do. Also, knowledge and understanding of social inequalities and cultural issues are not on the same level as *insight*. Insight is like understanding the board position in a game of chess, but *also* knowing the correct move that will help you win. Insight is required to create interventions that actually improve important things. Everyone suffers cognitive biases such as overconfidence. We incorrectly equate knowledge with insight. This is because we don't know what we don't know.

Founders / leaders must take that step back and think if what they do actually matters. It may feel and look like it matters to your team, your sponsors, and even the people you are trying to help. But feeling and looking is not the same as actually being true. Your job is to find who this problem really affects, understand how, and solve it. This task is colossal, but such work is why we are on this earth.

**Point 2: focus is critical and non-linear.**

I believe you will make much more progress in solving one of these problems if you focus 100% on it, versus splitting your efforts between the two. Fortunately, my colleague does not have "fake problems" because both of these problems are real. Tons of data (and common sense) suggests disadvantaged high school students ... are disadvantaged. Financial disparities have sequelae on their health, communities, and the broader economy. The other issue is obesity, which is not a controversy. Obesity disproportionately affects Latinos. Both issues matter. But which one would you do, if you could only do one?

In my experience starting and running initiatives / groups (none of which have been for-profit enterprises), focus is non-linear. Working for 10 hours on topic A translates to 10 units of work (assuming one unit of work per hour). However, working for 5 hours on topic A and 5 hours on topic B tends to translate into <5 units of progress for each. The ratio of unit work per hour diminishes given the cost of switching attention, managing separate teams of people, having to meet lots of potential sponsors, etc. We probably have higher cognitive bandwidth than average people, but not infinitely so.

In fact, if you chose one initiative, listed goals, and estimated the time and money to complete those goals, you would not complete them all, and go over time and over budget. This [planning fallacy](http://erikreinertsen.com/planning-fallacy/) is human nature for large projects, and accounting for it is wise. Yes, you can buy groceries, pick up laundry, and clean your room over the weekend, but that is not the same as planning a large initiative with many unknowns.

These days, I limit the number of new things I do, increase my task time by 25%, and assume I will still fail at several things. I *still* bite off more than I can chew. Balancing Forge with my PhD work is very difficult and I need to do it better. Realism is not pessimism, and achieving what you set out to do beats fake optimism every day.
