---
layout: post
title: Why we started Forge
tags: culture,tech
---

> This is the inaugural blog post I wrote for Forge's new website.

I am excited to kick off 2015 with an inaugural blog post exploring Forge’s story, principles, and vision of improving healthcare through technology. I will also highlight five lessons we learned along the way.

Rewind to 2013: as a medical student interested in building new ways to help patients, I was not alone in Atlanta. My colleagues and I enjoyed meeting with residents, faculty, and young professionals to discuss technology innovation in medicine. Our gatherings were informal – a one-on-one for coffee, or a brunch over mutual interests.

One afternoon, a group of Biomedical Engineering students from Georgia Tech approached us. The engineers were starting capstone, a semester-long technical project, and wanted to meet clinicians for input. We offered to host a meeting, but realized we could take this idea to a higher level. In October 2013, my colleagues and I organized “[Medicine 2.0](http://forgehealth.org/reports/2013med20.pdf)”, the first multidisciplinary brainstorming session at Emory University School of Medicine connecting clinicians with engineers and students from Georgia Tech. Medicine 2.0 was one of many gatherings that year that revealed much interest in solving healthcare problems through technology. **Lesson 1 is about ambition**: anyone can catalyze large movements, as long as they keep their eyes open for opportunities, resources, and partners.

We hypothesized there was a nascent community of healthcare innovators in Atlanta. To learn more about this ecosystem, we tagged along with an executive team from Emory University through [Flashpoint](flashpoint.gatech.edu), the amazing startup accelerator at Georgia Tech. Our team had 200+ conversations with scientists, physicians, industry professionals, investors, etc. We discovered pockets of startup activity relevant to healthcare, but this fledgling ecosystem was disorganized. We also learned many people are interested in healthcare entrepreneurship. Unfortunately, they do not believe Atlanta has adequate culture, resources, and opportunities to succeed in this space. **Lesson 2 is about perception**: what people do, or do not do, speaks louder than what they say.

We believed our first hypothesis was reasonable, so we took on a new challenge of jump-starting healthcare innovation by building a cohesive ecosystem. In early 2014, I co-founded Forge with Evan McClure, an MD/MBA student. Evan’s business interests, get-it-done work ethic, and ambitious vision are unique even among medical professionals. Together we recruited a team, organized events, and continued learning about healthcare startups. **Lesson 3 is about team growth**: include people that truly believe in your vision. Do not add people because you need help with the work. You will lower the quality, drive, and productivity of your team. You also will inevitably need to let people go, so minimize suboptimal hires from day one.

In the fall of 2014, Forge organized the [first healthcare hackathon in Atlanta](http://forgehealth.org/2014hackathonsummary.pdf) under the leadership of Kevin Olsen. The success of this event followed months of well-attended events and continued sponsorship interest. We felt the scarcity of resources available to healthcare startup founders was a real problem that we could help with. To better serve this goal, we incorporated as a non-profit organization under the leadership of Arash Harzand, MD, MBA (current co-managing director). This reorganization enables us to raise more money and market ourselves with transparency and credibility. We also teamed up with leaders from academia, industry, and the investment community, some of whom will join our Board of Directors. Our leadership team is maturing to reflect how serious we are about accomplishing our goals, and we are excited to take advantage of the rich talent and resources Atlanta offers to startup founders. **Lesson 4 is about ecosystem**: instead of reinventing the wheel, find a way to make it better. We want to make Atlanta’s healthcare community stronger, and care about results, not credit.

Although only a month into 2015, Forge is already surging forward with new ideas, leaders, and partners. We will offer a new hackathon (rebranded to the "Health Innovation Challenge"), content-rich Bootcamps organized by Liz-Ann, and creative new Salons thanks to Emily and her team. We have a fresh look with a redesigned logo and website. Our logo embodies our vision of improving healthcare through technology, while the orange color symbolizes energy, creativity, and determination.

However, we must always focus on the signal over the noise. There is too much of the latter. Every week there is a new (but useless) meetup, group, or conference. What is actually useful? We are often asked questions like “how many people attend your events?”, and “how much money have you raised?”. These vanity metrics are irrelevant in lieu of Forge’s real vision: to improve healthcare through technology. This is why we constantly meet and learn from founders. **Lesson 5 is about focus**: constantly debate, measure, and revise what actually matters. When a founder builds something that helps a single patient or a provider, the thousands of hours of work from our team will not feel like a donation. It will feel like an investment, and it will be among the best we ever make.

Our journey has taught us a lot, and hopefully provided value to our growing healthcare startup ecosystem. We are grateful to leaders like Jack Tillman, Rachael Hagan, Harold Solomon, and David Hartnett for their support. But our work has only begun as we make Atlanta a destination for outstanding healthcare founders and investors. On behalf of our leadership team, I invite you to join Forge as we invent the future of medicine.

*Erik Reinertsen*<br>
Co-founder & Managing Director, Forge<br>

