---
title: Make $43,000 by not paying your medical school debt
layout: post
tags: academia, finance
---

During residency, it is economically better to invest $5,000 per year in a [Roth IRA](https://www.wikiwand.com/en/Roth_IRA) instead of paying off the equivalent amount of medical school debt. How much better? *Tens of thousands of dollars* better when you retire! Here I will explain why the Roth IRA is a good financial decision for young doctors-in-training.

##What is a Roth IRA?
The Roth IRA is retirement plan for people who don't make much money. You can deposit up to $5,500 a year. Your maximum deposit limit goes down quickly once your income exceeds $116,000 (i.e. attending-level salary).

Roth IRAs usually contain investments in securities (common stocks and bonds), as well as mutual funds. By accumulating compound interest until you retire, your investment can grow a lot. Perhaps most importantly, you can withdraw money from a Roth IRA *without* tax penalties. In contrast, withdrawals from a regular IRA can be taxed about 50%.

##Why is a Roth IRA good for resident physicians?
Because they make sufficiently low incomes to contribute the maximum amount. Eventual returns on the Roth IRA are high enough to outweight the accrued interest from not paying off medical school loans with the money you instead invested.

In other words, you will end up with *much more money* if you contribute modestly to a Roth IRA during residency instead of repaying loans with that cash.

##Sounds too good to be true. Show me the numbers.
Let's walk through an example. Say you save up $10,000 over 5 years. Let's divide that money into two $5,000 investments. The first investment is today and the second investment is 5 years from now, when you are no longer elibible to put money in a Roth IRA. Remember, when you finish residency, your attending-level income makes you ineligible.

Let's assume the following values:

| Interest rate on medical school loan       | 6% |
| Annual return on Roth IRA                  | 7% |
| Annual return on regular IRA/401K          | 7% |
| Tax rate on money withdrawn from Roth IRA 	 | 0% |
| Tax rate on money withdrawn from regular IRA/401K | 50% |
| Age at start of residency             	 | 26 |
| Age at retirement                          | 65 |

We have two options for our $10,000 of savings:

1. Deposit the first $5,000 in a Roth IRA today, and 5 years later use the second $5,000 to repay part of your loan.
2. Use the first $5,000 to repay part of your loan today, and 5 years later deposit the second $5,000 in your regular IRA.

If you pursue option 1 and compound a $5,000 investment in your Roth IRA by 7% annually for 39 years, you could withdraw $69,974.10 when you retire. The net value of option 1 is therefore $69,974.10.

However, option 1 avoids repaying $5,000 of your loan for 5 years. The loan accrues $1,691.13 of interest if you don't repay $5,000 towards your debt on day 1.

If you pursue option 2, you avoid the interest that would have otherwise accrued. Also, 5 years later you invest $5,000 into a regular IRA. This compounds for 34 years (39-5) to a total of $49,890.57. Withdrawals from regular IRAs are taxable (~50%) so you end up with $24,945.28. The net value of option 2 is therefore $1,691.13 + $24,945.28 = $26,636.41.

The value of option 1 minus the value of option 2 equals **$43,337.69**.

[Download this spreadsheet](/assets/rothira.xls) to adjust variables and calculate these results yourself.

##Limitations
In real life, it is hard to save $5,000 a year. People tend to spend more when they make more money.

Now imagine saving $5,000 a year while facing immense debt. The average amount of debt US medical students graduate with is $176,000 ([source](https://www.aamc.org/download/296002/data/aibvol12_no2.pdf)). This includes nearly $58,500 in interest charges over the life of the loan. If the physician repays this debt over 10 years, they would pay $1,954 every month. Now add rent, food, taxes, and other costs of living. Quite a challenge!

Roth IRAs are a good investment over time because loan and Roth IRA interest rates are roughly equal, and the opportunity cost of not repaying the loan (i.e. the money you contribute to the Roth IRA instead of debt) is low, around $5-15K total. However, you will generate less value if you retire or cash out your Roth IRA earlier, contribute less to your Roth IRA, etc.

##Conclusion
It is economically superior to contribute ~$5,000 every year during residency to your Roth IRA, instead of using that money to repay loans, despite accrual of interest.

The total contribution to a Roth IRA might only be $5-15K, but at retirement could be worth tens to hundreds of thousands of dollars.

Your home mortgage, dream vacation, or child's college education deserves a rigorous examination of investing opportunities.
